marco
gather for their annual rut
males must fight for the right to breed
but on these sheer cliffs any slip by
either animal
could be fatal
a snow leopard the rarest of himalayan
animals
it's a female returning to her lair
these are the first intimate images of
snow leopard
ever filmed in the wild
[Music]
she greets her one-year-old cub
her den is well chosen it has
exceptional views of the surrounding
cliffs
on these treacherous slopes no hunter
other than the snow leopard would have a
chance of catching such agile prey
a female with young makes an easier
target
a large pores give an excellent grip
and that long tail helps her balance
silently she positions herself above her
prey
[Music]
okay
the sea ice will not freeze properly
till it reaches minus two degrees
for now it's still too warm
this ice is no use to the bears they
can't walk on it
to hunt
the normally unsocial bears gather in
groups
trapped on the shoreline
this is the time of year the male bears
spa
only the biggest bears have the energy
reserves to fight
after a summer without food the bear
systems are in no gear
these aerobics help warm them up in
readiness for the winter hunting ahead
[Music]
uh
um
oh
it's late october but still the sea
hasn't frozen
for every degree rise in the average
temperature
the summer melt is extended by a whole
week
that's more bad news for polar bears
smaller younger bears don't have the
energy of the big males
each day they are without food they lose
nearly a kilo
some have lost half of their body weight
these hungry bears must now rest in the
snow
and conserve energy all they can do
is wait
sunlight brings a flush of new greenery
to the forest floor
these plant pioneers now have full
access to the endless summer sunshine
fireweed is the first to stick its claim
it flowers through the hazy days and
alaskans call it
summer's timekeeper the flowers unfold
from the bottom of the plant
when they reach the top that's the end
of summer
it's a warning that despite the summer
heat
the first snows of winter are only weeks
away
high up in the taokitina mountains
there's one alaskan who's already
prepared
[Music]
the colored pika
he's spent his entire summer hard at
work
when the winter comes his favorite
grasses and sedges will be buried under
the snow
but he's not worried he's been saving
food for the lean months ahead
hidden among the rocks is his winter
larder
he's carefully positioned it to catch
the sun's rays
which dry and cure his supply
half a meter wide and 30 centimeters
deep
this haystack is his survival rations
he's chosen the contents meticulously
he's picked some toxic plants these will
decompose slower
and keep food for eating pressure for
longer
like all alaskans he knows that winter
preparations start early
and you have to make the most of
summer's bounty
the sun is getting lower summer
is drawing to a close
a cold autumn rain hangs on the rose
hips
the last harvest of the year
the days of succulent young plants are
long gone
soon there will be nothing left to eat
this is why bears hibernate with no more
food to be found
the bears slow down their bodies to
sleep until spring
mother has led them to the canyon
the shorter days trigger hormones acting
like sleeping bills
making them drowsy
hibernating their heart rate will drop
from 90
to 8 beats per minute they'll go without
eating
drinking or passing waste for seven
months
the time for suckling is almost over
the first snow on the mountain tops
signals the change in seasons
but true to form mum is well prepared
with grizzlies and coyotes about she's
already found a secure den
site deep in the canyon
but the slope is loose and treacherous
she's been digging this den concealed by
a fallen tree
for weeks
bears slumber lightly while hibernating
keeping their brains at a higher
temperature than the rest of their
bodies
if trouble comes they can still respond
with good reason grizzlies have been
known to dig up dens
and eat black bears alive
this winter the family will hibernate
together
uh
thanks to their mother the cubs have
made it through their first
summer at times they've been lucky to
survive
next summer she'll abandon them
their lessons over the cubs will have to
make it on their own
but by then they'll be ready to go their
separate ways
in big sky country
a beaver one of the family that lives
here in this lake
at the foot of the teton mountains in
wyoming
while beavers can get around perfectly
well on land
they're most at home in the water where
their webbed hind feet and large
paddle-like tail
make them powerful swimmers above and
below the surface
like marmots beavers feed on all kinds
of vegetation
and eat wood as well as leaves
and their accomplished engineers this
great pond
is entirely their own creation
only a few years ago this shallow pebbly
stream
flowed straight down the valley then a
family of beavers moved in
and built a dam
the main body of it is built of boulders
on the downstream side it's been lined
with logs
some of them big and quite heavy and on
this side
it's been packed with mud and vegetation
it's been built so accurately that it is
to within a few inches horizontal across
its entire length of about
150 yards from one side to the other
and the lake it's created stretches
upstream
for almost a mile
so important is there damn to them that
if they detect the slightest leak
usually by hearing the sound of
trickling water they start repair work
immediately
mud is needed as well as logs
the repair team will labor away until
the leak
is fully repaired
maintaining the water at a high level
brings the beavers
several advantages one of which is that
it floods the surrounding woodlands
and so enables them to swim in safety to
their main source of food
they increase the distance they can swim
by
digging channels that lead into the very
heart of the woodland
here they can use their sharp incisor
teeth to
strip off the bark from a fallen tree
trunk and nibble at it
while still being close enough to water
to slip away
should a bear or a mountain lion turn up
their network of channels also enables
them to ferry whole branches
back to their pond
and there where the water is deepest
they dive
down and push each branch firmly into
the mud
at the bottom
this is the beaver's fridge where the
vegetation will keep fresh through the
long winter
when the pond is covered with ice
stocking the fridge takes a lot of work
and the beavers
are at their busiest in autumn
[Music]
at one side of the lake stands their
lodge a fortress built of branches and
boulders
that's so strong that not even a bear
could break into it
the only entrance is through tunnels
that open underwater
and the beavers take refuge here
whenever they are alarmed
that was a warning signal to say that
danger was around let's
say me and now i may not see the beavers
for some time
they can stay underwater for five
minutes at a time
up to 15 if they need to they can
actually get back to the safety of their
lodge
without putting their head above the
surface for a single second
most lodges have at least two different
entrances
by october winter is well underway
but whereas marmots would now be
hibernating the beavers are still active
and will remain that way throughout the
winter
even when the pond ice is over
completely they're still
able to swim under the ice to get back
and forth to their lodge
no one knew exactly what went on inside
the lodge during winter
so when the beavers were away we
installed a couple of infrared cameras
in order to find out
a branch from the fridge is being
brought back to the lodge
for the whole family to feed on
and another
no wonder they don't need to hibernate
with this ingenious setup
the lodge is warm and safe even in
midwinter and the only sign of activity
in the snug home beneath the snow is hot
air rising from the vent at the top
inside our cameras catch a glimpse of
what at first sight
looks like a very small beaver
it's a must-grab there are pair of them
in here
this is a new observation
do the beavers actually know in the
pit's blackness
that there are strangers among them
we noticed that the muskrats regularly
left the lodge
to forage under the ice
and on several occasions they returned a
few minutes later
with a load of fresh reeds
perhaps the muskrats are paying rent by
regularly providing fresh bedding for
the lodge
maybe that is why the beavers accept
them and even allow them to share their
food
our infrared lights however are no
longer welcome
it seems
we think of barn owls as birds of dusk
and night
haunters of the dark creatures of the
moon
so to see them hunting by day out here
along the essex sea wall
startles me
in daylight they resemble apparitions
the closest thing to ghosts in the bird
world
flying with a supernatural vigilance
to me they set the land over which they
move a light
with wildness
they pass through the air these birds
with the silence of falling snow
what does it take for lily to get
airborne
to find out lloyd and rose have enlisted
the help
of bird expert professor graham martin
and high-speed cameraman mark payne gill
for a bird to take to the air it has to
overcome
two forces
gravity the invisible pull that keeps us
grounded
and drag which is the resistance we
experience as we move through the air
birds use their wings to create lift
and thrust
but how do they do it
bird's wings are the shape of an airfoil
air traveling over the top of the wing
has to travel faster than air traveling
beneath
this creates a difference in air
pressure which generates lift
to gain forward momentum birds flap
their wings
this makes the air flowing over them
spiral off the trailing edge
these vortices thrust the bird forwards
and upwards
these are the basic principles of all
flight
but what's so unique about the way owls
fly
we fly quite a few different types of
bird yeah
varying sizes yeah but the one thing i
notice about the owls
is they always appear to be a lot slower
than the flying than the other birds
well all birds have got different wing
shapes and they can fly at different
speeds it's just like aircraft
so if you look at the wing size of a
barn owl it's actually got a very big
wing
and so they can fly very slow very
controlled
to really understand the barn owl's slow
flight
lloyd's putting lily to the test against
two of his other birds maisie the
grey-like goose
a long-distance endurance flyer
and moses the peregrine falcon one of
the fastest birds on earth
the peregrine takes the lead its long
and pointed wings are quite flat
designed for speed and maneuverability
which it needs to hunt
the goose is next weighing three
kilograms
its relatively short and narrow wings
work hard to get it airborne
the barn owl has the largest wings in
relation to its body
and its airfoil is very curved which
generates a huge amount of lift
so the barn owl can fly slower and with
fewer wing beats
than most other birds
[Music]
you